Don’t keep a saga in both camps (#247)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/dont-keep-a-saga-in-both-camps.md

For the sake of the discussion, let's rephrase the question a bit by changing one word:

> If a saga operates on multiple _autonomous components_, how can we adhere to the autonomy principle and make it so that they are independently deployable?

We're now using only the SOA lingo. Before continuing, an autonomous component is not a microservice. However, if we have to make a theory comparison, that's the best equation we can do. In the orchestration versus choreography post, when talking about the choreography approach, I presented the following diagram:

![choreography](/img/posts/dont-keep-a-saga-in-both-camps/choreopgraphy.png){:class="img-fluid mx-auto d-block"}

If we were to implement the above architecture using NServiceBus, we would use the following NServiceBus features:

![choreography with NServiceBus](/img/posts/dont-keep-a-saga-in-both-camps/choreopgraphy-with-nsb.png){:class="img-fluid mx-auto d-block"}

> We're using a mix of [sagas](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/sagas/) and regular [message handlers](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/handlers/). One thing that captures the attention is that some saga communicates using events, and others using commands. The "do something" semantic of commands generates more coupling. Are those sagas, in reality, orchestrators?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're using a mix of [sagas](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/sagas/) and regular [message handlers](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/handlers/). One thing that captures the attention is that some sagas communicate using events, and others using commands. The "do something" semantic of commands generates more coupling. Are those sagas, in reality, orchestrators?
```

## Transactions, transactions everywhere

> Let's pause for a second the architectural discussion, and let's have a look at the technical implementation. The payment gateway component is part of the payment process. We're deploying it separately and mediating the communication using messages for a technical reason: We cannot enlist any of the payment gateway operations in a transaction. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's pause the architectural discussion for a second, and let's have a look at the technical implementation. The payment gateway component is part of the payment process. We're deploying it separately and mediating the communication using messages for a technical reason: We cannot enlist any of the payment gateway operations in a transaction. 
```

> The system dialogues with the payment provider through HTTP, and web requests cannot be enlisted in ACID transactions. The finance policy implementation uses an NServiceBus saga. The saga state needs to be stored. The store operation is transactional and includes any outgoing message. For example, the following operations are all in the same transaction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system talks to the payment provider through HTTP, and web requests cannot be enlisted in ACID transactions. The finance policy implementation uses an NServiceBus saga. The saga state needs to be stored. The store operation is transactional and includes any outgoing message. For example, the following operations are all in the same transaction:
```

```csharp
async Task Handle(AMessage msg, IMessageHandlerContex ctx)
{
   Data.SomeData = msg.SomeData;
   await ctx.Send( new AnotherMessage() );
}
```

> > if the underlying queuing infrastructure doesn't support transactions NServiceBus Outbox feature allows to guarantee an exactly-once message processing behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> if the underlying queuing infrastructure doesn't support transactions, the NServiceBus [outbox feature](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/outbox/) guarantees an exactly-once message processing behavior.
```

> For those not used to the NServideBus API, the `Data` property is an instance of the saga state. The state gets serialized and stored to the underlying storage to persist across multiple message processing.

On the other hand, in the following example, the HttpClient web request cannot be enlisted in the same transaction as the other two operations:

```csharp
async Task Handle(AMessage msg, IMessageHandlerContex ctx)
{
   Data.SomeData = msg.SomeData;
   await httpClient.PostAsync( ... );
   await ctx.Send( new AnotherMessage() );
}
```

For that reason, we offload the non-transactional operation to a different handler and mediate the communication using a message:

```csharp
async Task Handle(AMessage msg, IMessageHandlerContex ctx)
{
   Data.SomeData = msg.SomeData;
   await ctx.Send( new PerformHttpRequest() );
   await ctx.Send( new AnotherMessage() );
}
```

The `PerformHttpRequest` message will be handled in isolation by a message handler and potentially in a different endpoint, whose only responsibility will be to perform the HttpRequest. It's the single responsibility principle (SRP) applied to distributed systems.

## Interesting, isn't that orchestration?

> uhm...no. If the payment service were to say to the shipping service, now it's time to ship, using a command, that would have been orchestration. In the presented scenario, payment is talking to itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
umm...no. If the payment service were to say to the shipping service, now it's time to ship, using a command, that would have been orchestration. In the presented scenario, payment is talking to itself.
```
